---
title:  "2022 Reflections, 2023 Targets"
date:   2023-01-01
permalink: /writings/2023/01/2023-resolutions
---

It's that time of the year again. I'm more grumpy this time around. An update to last year's [resolutions](/writings/2022/01/2022-resolutions).

## 2022 Grades

<details><summary>1. Stand.</summary>
❌ **Fail**. I wanted to stand while working. This turns out to be a literal pain in the ass. I bought a standing desk but pretty quickly gave up.

</details>

<details><summary>2. Read for cheap.</summary>
✅ **Partial Pass**. I did buy a Kindle and pirate/read lots of e-books. But I didn't do so nearly as much as I had hoped. I also recently discovered [Second Story Books](https://www.secondstorybooks.com/).

</details>

<details><summary>3. Cold, hard meditation.</summary>
❌ **Fail**. I stopped meditating when I got to school. Cold showers are sporadic, and I'm definitely distracted by podcasts while showering.

</details>

<details><summary>4. Text 1st.</summary>
✅ **Partial Pass**. I do text more. Probably not my default, but I'll give an A for effort.

</details>

<details><summary>5. Owl to lark.</summary>
❌ **Fail**. All the sunrises I saw were right before bedtime.

</details>

<details><summary>6. Regular running.</summary>
❌ **Fail**. I did run more in the spring, but not nearly as much as I wished.

</details>

<details><summary>7. Gains.</summary>
✅ **Pass**. I was quite good about this. Benched 300! 

</details>

<details><summary>8. Clean.</summary>
✅ **Partial Pass**. My *own* room was quite clean, but I've been a very messy roommate. Will need to work on that.

</details>

<details><summary>9. Bye-bye boba.</summary>
❌ **Fail**. Sipping a matcha boba as I write this.

</details>

<details><summary>10. Journaling.</summary>
❌ **Fail**. I did keep a decent daily reflection habit, but I don't write on a consistent basis.

</details>

<details><summary>11. Social eating.</summary>
✅ **Pass**. I did make eating much more a social activity. I think probably ate most meals with people when I ate out.

</details>

<details><summary>12. Saying no.</summary>
✅ **Pass**. No more teaching, debate stuff, club commitments–Fall 2022 was just for classes, research, and friends. And it was nice!

</details>

Counting partial passes for half, I scored a 4.5/12. Still in **C** range, but doing better.

## 2023 Resolutions

Some measurable goals this time, by area of my life. Each of these is a stretch goal and I'll measure myself by distance from goal achieved.

Health:
1. Achieve and maintain a weight between 165-170 lbs. I think I'm probably healthiest/the most fit around there.
2. Bench 315 and rep 225 for 15. I think it should be fairly doable with enough training.
3. Run 3 miles at a 8:00 pace.
4. Eat at least one meal a day free of processed food. That includes ramen, protein bars, etc.
5. Never pull an all-nighter. Sleep at least 6 hours every night.
6. Stop biting nails.

Social:
1. Don't leave anyone on delivered for more than a day.
2. Be a better roommate — don't get yelled at for anything.
3. Get out of Berkeley with friends at least once every month during school.

Learning:
1. Never do homework the day it's due. There's not really an excuse for rushing homework.
2. Read at least 36 books. Works out to a book every 10 days or so, which seems pretty reasonable.
