# Chapter Notes

## Chapter 1

Businesses sell goods and services to earn profits. Profits are revenues mienus expenses. Under capitalism, consumers choose what to consume. Businesses spur innovations that improve quality of life.

The **external environment** of businesses comprise everything outside hte business.

- **Domestic business environment** = the location where the firm conducts operations.
- **Global business environment** = international forces, such as trade agreements, economic conditions, and political unrest.
- **Technological environment** = the ways in which firms create value, such as human knowledge, equipment, electronics, etc.
- **Political-legal environment** = relationship between business and government, e.g. regulations.
- **Sociocultural environment** = norms, customs, values.
- **Economic environment** = economic conditions, such as average wages and financial pressures.

An **economic system** is how a nation allocate its resources among its citizens. Different systems have different ways of managing **factors of production**. These include **labor** (or human capital), **capital** (the financial resources to create a business), **entreprenuers** (people who accept risks and create/operate businesses), **physical resources** (tangible resources used to run busiensses), and **information resources** (intangible goods, such as data and other information).

**Planned economies** rely on the government to control most factors of production. A **market economy** allows producers and consumers control production and allocation. Most countries have **mixed market economies** that regulate and restrict certain activitie. In transitioning frmo a planned to market economies, governments under **privatization**, converting government entreprises into privately owned companies.

**Demand** is the willingness and ability of buyers to purchase a product. **Supply** is the willingness and ability of producers to sell a good or service. According to the **laws and demand and supply**, buyers and producers with purchase more and supply less respectively as the price of a product drops.

A **private enterprise system** requires four elements: private property, freedom of choice, profits, and competition. Under **perfect competition**, all firms are small and there are many firms in the industry. In **monopolistic competition**, numerous competitors seek to differentiate their products. An **oligopoly** has only a handful of sellers, while a **monopoly** has only one producer.

Experts look at **economic indicators** to evaluate an economy. The **business cycle** involves ecomomic regular expenasions and contractions as measured in **aggregate output**, the total amount of goods and services produced. When output per capita goes up and a surplus exists, the **standard of living** goes up as well.

**GDP** refers ot the total valu eof all goods and services produced by a national economy thorugh domestic factors of production. **GNP** refers to all goods and services produced by a national economy regardless of where the factors of production are located. If General Motors operates a plant in Brazil, the profits are included in the U.S. GNP but not in the U.S. GDP.

Economists think GDP is more reliable because it only foucses on domestic factors of production. A common measure of quality of life **GDP per capita**. **Real GDP** adjusts the **nominal GDP** for changes in the value of currency.

**Productivity** is a measure of economic performance that roughly measures the efficiency of resource use. U.S. productivity is generall increases. 

**Balance of trade** referes to the value of exports minus the value of imports. A negative balance of trade is a **trade deficit**, a nation with a trade deficit is a **debtor nation** rather than a **creditor nation**.

**Stability** is a condition where the amount of monety avialable and the quantity of goods and services produced are growing as the same rate. **Inlfation occurs** when the economic system experiences widepsread price increases. Price indices such as the **consumer price index** measure the prices of typical products over time.

**Unemployment** is the level of joblessness among people actively seeking work. If wage rates get too high, business hire fewer workers. Unemployment often decreases income, leading to further unemployment. A **recession** is a period during which real GDP declines. A prolonged and deep recession is a **depression**.

The government uses **stabilization policy** to manage the economy, which comprises **fiscal policies** (via collection and spending of revenues) and **monetary policies** (via controlling the size of the nations monetary supply).

## Chapter 2

**Accounting** refers to collecitng, analyzing, adn communicating financial information. Accountants keep records of taxes, cinome, and expenses, a process called bookkeeping. In the modern area, the **accounting information system** is the procedure for retainingfinancial information. The info is used by managers (to make decisions), employees (for personal finance), investors (to estimate returns), tax authorities (to determine tax liabilities), and regulatory agencies (to ensure compliance). The **controller** ensures a firm's AIS provides the necessary info.

**Financial accounting** is concerned with external information users (e.g. income statements, balance sheets), while **managerial accounting** serves internal users (e.g. material costs). **Certified public accoutants** provide accounting services to the public. An **audit** examines the AIS for accuracy. **Tax services** help a business file taxes and save money. **Management advisory services** span perfonal finance to corporate mergers. Many accountants work before taking the CPA exam, often as **private accountants**; most private accountants are **manager accountants** , supporting managers, and many become **certified manageement accounts**.

**Forensic accounting** is the use of accounting for legal purposes, holding company records to scrutiny. They often investgate financial trails and support litigation. The **Certified Fraud Examiner** designation requires an exam that covers fraud prevention and deterrence, financial transactions, fraud investigation, and legal elements of fraud.

The **Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002** was designed to improve  trust in accounting by restricting the kinds of services a firm can provide. For example, an accounting firm cannot design a business's AIS and also perform their audits.

The **accounting equation** is:
$$
Assets = Liabiltiies + Owner's\ Equity
$$
After each transaction, the accounting equation must be in balance. An **asset** is any economic resources that benefits a firm, including land, buildings, equipment, inventories, and accounts receivable. A **liability** is a debt the firms owes to an outside party. The **owners' equity** is the amount of money that owners would receive if they sold of a company's assets at their presumed values; an equivalent term is **net worth**. Owners' equity consists of the original investment of the owners and profits earned by and reinvested in the company.

There are three kinds of **financial statements**: balance sheets, income statements, and statements of cash flows.

**Balance sheets** provide detailed information about assets, liabilities, and owner's equity.

- **Current assets** include cash and assets that can be liquidated within a year. Marketable securities and merchandise inventory can be quickly liquidated. **Fixed assets** have long-term value, but buildings and equipment depreciate. **Intangible assets** have value in the form of expected benefits, sich as fees paid. **Goodwill** is the amount a buyer would pay beyond the value of tangible assets.

- **Current liabilities** are debts to be paid within a year, including accounts parable, unpaid bills to suppliers, wages, and taxes. **Long-term liabilities** usually include borrowed funds.

- Owner's equity is comprised of **paid-in capital** (invested by owners) and **retained earnings** (net profits kept by the firm).

**Income statements** are descriptions of profits and revenues, divided into revenues, cost of revenues, operating expenses, and net income. **Revenues** are funds that flow into a business from selling goods and services. The **cost of revenues** can include costs paid to manufacturers, licensing fees, third-party services, etc. Other companies report **cost of goods sold**, which comprise the costs of obtaining and transforming materials to make physical products. **Gross profit** is the revenues minus the cost of revenues.

**Operating expenses** are resources that must flow out of a company to earn revenue. It often comprises **research development** and **selling, administrative, and general**. **Operating income** is gross profit minus operating expenses.

The **statement of cash flows** summarizes cash receipts and payments, spanning operating activities, investing activities, and financing activities.

- **Cash flows from operations** include transactions involved in buying and selling goods and services.
- **Cash flows from investing** includes receipts and payments from buying and selling stocks, bonds, property, and other assets.
- **Cash flows from financing** include inflows from borrowing or issuing stock, and outflows for paying dividends or repaying borrowed money.

The **budget** is a detailed report on estimate receipts and expenditures for a period of one year, 3 years, or 5 years.

**Generally accepted accounting principles** (GAAP) guide reporting, including **revenue recognition**. Earnings are not reported until the earnings cycle is completed, which means the sale is complete and the sale price is collectible. The **full disclosure** principle suggests that management should interpret and explain the numbers and leave their comments.

There are groups of ratios: **solvency ratios** for estimating risk, **profitability ratios** for measuring potential earnings, and **activity ratios** for evaluating asset efficiency.

**Short-term solvnecy ratios** measure the ability to pay immediate debts, among which a common choice is the **current ratio**, dividing current assets by current liabilities. A current ratio of 2:1 or higher is satisfactory.
$$
Current\ Ratio = \frac{Current\ Assets}{Current\ Liabilities}
$$
**Long-term solvency** is calculated by dividing **debt** by owner's equity. Borrowing is often beneficial because it gives firms **leverage**.
$$
\text{Long-term solvency} = \frac{\text{Debt}}{\text{Leverage}}
$$


**Earnings per share** is the net income divided by the number of shares of common stock. the **price earnings ratio** is the share price to earnings per share.
$$
\text{Earnings per share} = \frac{\text{Net income}}{\text{Number of shares}}\\
\text{Price earnings ratio} = \frac{\text{Share price}}{\text{Earnings per share}}
$$
**Activities ratio** measure the efficiency of resources. The ratio of profits to assets and the inventory turnover ratio are common measures of efficiency.
$$
\text{Asset turnover} = \frac{\text{Total sales}}{\text{Average assets}}
$$


The **code of professional conduct** identifies responsibiltiies as a professional, serving the public interest, maintaining integrity, being objective and independent, maintaining standards through due care, and professional conduct in providing services as areas were accountants must comply.

## Chapter 3

**Money** is portable, divisible, durable, and stable. It serves as a medium of exchange, store of value, and a measure of worth.

There are multiple measures of monetary supply.

- **M-1** counts only the most liquid form s of money. Paper money and coins are **currency (cash)**. **Checks** instruct banks to pay a given sum. **Checking accounts**/**demand deposits** can be withdrawn at any time.
- **M-2** includes short-term investments such as time deposits, mutual funds, and savings account. **time deposits** have a fixed term, and deposits less than $100,000 are counted in M-2. In money market mutual funds, companies by low-risk, short-term financial securities. Credit cards are not included.

Financial institutions facilitate the flow of money from those with surpluses to those with deficits.

- **Commerical banks** accept deposits, make loans, earn profits, and pay interest and dividends. To compete, banks have begun to offer loans at rates below the **price rate**. Banks often offer trust services, under which banks manage logistical tasks.
- **Savings institutions** include mutual savings banks and savings and loan associations (S&Ls). S&Ls accept deposits, make loans, and are owned by investors. Mutual savings banks divide profits proportionately among investors.
- **Credit unions** are nonprofit institutions run by their members designed to promote thrift.
- **Non deposit institutions** use funds for things other than earning interest.
  - **Pension funds** provide retirement income, primarily social security. IRAs are tax-deffered retirement funds.
  - **insurance companies** use money frmo premiums to provide coverage.
  - **Fiannce companies** make loans to businesses and consumers.
  - **Securities investment dealers** buy and sell stocks and bonds for client investors.
- **International services** include currency exchange, letters of credit (a promise to pay if conditions are meant), and banker's acceptances (promises to pay some amount).
- **Financial advice and brokerage services** recommend investment opportunities.
- **Electronic funds transfer** services like PayPal make it easier to send payments. **Automated teller machines** (ATMs) let companies withdraw money, make despotis,a dn trasfer funds from anywhere.

Financial institutions create money by making loans. Banks can loan out most of the money they take in deposit. The **Federal Deposit Insurance Corporations** supervises banks and insures deposits. The FDIC guarantees the safety of all accounts if the bank collapses up to $250,000.

The **Fed** is independent of political pressures and led by a Board of Governers. The Federal Open Market Committee makes policies; it is staffed by the seven governors and 5 of the 12 reserve bank presidents. All charatered banks are members of the Fed; others are subject to its regulations and are covered by other regulatory agencies.

The Fed's functions include:

- **The government's bank**, producing the nation's paper currency.
- **The banker's bank**, lending money to individual banks.
- **Check clearing**, ensuring cash is properly deducted and deposited.
- **Monetary policy**, promoting economic growth by managing the money supply and interest rates. **Inflation** refers to widespread price increases, whereas **deflation** occurs when the supply of goods outpaces the supply of money.

The Fed has three avenues to affect the economy:

1. **Open market operations** refers to the sale and purchase of securities. The Fed can buy securities from commercial dealers or sell Treasury securities.
2. **Discount rate** of loans to banks; the **federal funds rate** is the rate that banks lend reserves to each other. It ranges from 1 to 5%.
3. **Cash reserve requirements**, which can restrict how much supply can expand, often 10% for the largest transactions and 3% for transactions between 12 and 80 million.

After the Great Recession, the Fed made loans to banks to help them write off or sell bad mortgages. The government imposed assurances, holding loans, mortgages, and securities until repaid.

Banks are required by regulations to maintain systems for identifying suspicious activities. Electronic technologies have improved efficiency and customer service.

- **Atuomated Clearing House** (ACH) provides interbank clearing of electronic payments, allowing businesses, government, and consumers to choose electronic alternatives.
- **Check 21** is a law that lets a receiving bank make an electronic image of paper checks.
- **Blink Credit Card** use a computer chip to send signals.
- **Debit Cards** allow users to transfer money between accounts.
- **Smart cards** can be programmed with electronic money.

Often, weak currencies can be good news for exporters. Central banks can change currency values by controlling the monetary supply. In transactions, balanced trades do not have to involve flows of money. The **World Bank** funds national improvements while the **IMF** promotes economic health.

## Chapter 4

The **time value of money** reflects the ability to gain value via interest or other forms of return. **Compound growth** refers to the cumulative growth from interest paid over time periods. The rule of 72: the number of years to double your money is roughly the percent annual interest rate divided binto 72.

A **stock** is a portion of the ownership of a corporation. A share of **common stock** is the most basic form of ownership. The value of a stock is expressed in **market value** (the amount buyers will pay) and **book value** (the firm's owner's equity).

Common stocks are risky investments. Unprofitable years and changing economic conditions can cause unstable profits. A **dividend** is a payment to shareholders; some profits distribute 30 to 70 percent of profits to shareholders. **Blue-chip stocks** have historically provided reliable dividends.

**Mutual funds** pool individual and organization investments to purchase bundles of stocks, bonds, and securities. Investors in **no-load funds** are not charged comissions. **Load funds** pay comissions of 2 to 8 percent.

Investors can invest for financial stability, conservative growth, and aggressive growth. Most managed funds don't perform as well as the market. Passively managed funds such as index mutual funds mimic the performance of market indices.

An **exchange-traded fund** tracks the overall perforamnce of a market and is traded like a stock. It is advantageous of mutual funds because they can be traded throughout the day, involve little to no human decisions, and require no minimum investment.

Stocks, bonds, and mutual funds are **securities** because they represent secured claims; they are **securities markets**. In **primary securities markets**, stocks and bonds are sold by firms and governments; private placements let issuers keep plans confidential. Usually, stocks are sold on a public market governed by the **Securities and Exchange Comission** (SEC). A firm relies on an **investment bank** to launch an IPO which advises companies on timing and financial terms, underwrites the new securities, and creates distribution networks for the securities.

Exisiting stocks and bonds are sold in the **secondary securities market**. A **stock exchange** is a group of individuals coordinated to provide an auction. The major stock exchanges are the New York Stock Exchange (a **hybrid market**), various global stock exchanges, and the NASDAQ market (a **electronic market**). **Electronic communication networks** bring buyers and sellers together outside of exchanges.

Individual investors include **stock brokers** (who earn commissions by trading for customers), **discount brokers** (who offer a low-cost way to buy stocks), **full-service brokers** (who offer financial advice), and **online investors** (who buy and sell thousands of companies).

**Market indexes** summarizes overall price trends, including **bull** (over a year of growth) and **bear** (20 percent off peak price) market trends. the **Dow Jones Industrial Average** is the oldest and most widely cited index, averaging prices for 30 large firms. The **S&P 500** lists the top 500 stocks, whereas the **NASDAQ Composite Index** tracks all stocks. The **Russell 2000 Index** measures the performance of the smallest companies. **Index-matching ETFs** track these indices.

Each investment has a **risk-return relationship**: safer investments offer lower returns, riskier investment offer higher returns. Roughly, the ranking is: short-term Treasuery Bills, high-grade corporate bonds, high-quality common stocks, balanced mutual funds, medium-quality preferred stocks, high-quality common stocks, junk bonds, low-quality common stocks.

The rat eof return paid to shareholders is the **current dividend yield** (or **current interest yield** for investments).
$$
\text{Current dividend yield} = \frac{\text{Dividend income}}{\text{Current market value}}
$$
**Price appreciation** is an increase in the dollar value of an investment. The profit realized is a **capital gain**. The total return is the yield and capital gain over the original investment:
$$
\text{Total return} = \frac{\text{Current dividend + Capital gains}}{\text{Original investment } \times 100}
$$
**Diversification** fefers to buying different kinds of investments to mitigate risk. This includes investing across sectors and across asset class. Employees who have all of hteir investments in a company's risk could lose their savings if the company goes bankrupt.

**Asset allocation** is the proportion of funds investing in each investment alternatives. A **portfolio** is the combined holdings of all financial investments. Together, diversification and asset allocation enable a firm to protect against risk.

Firms under secured loans by pledging an asset as **collateral**. The money that must be repaid is the **loan principal** and the additional fee is the **interest**, which depends on the **annual percentage rate** (APR). With an **unsecured loan**, the bank usually requires the borrower to maintain a compensating balance.

Entreprenuers underestimate the value of bank credit lines; the U.S. Small business Administration may also guarantee a loan if the small business is prudent, planning for cash flow requirements. Outside individuals who provide capital are **angel investors**, providing **venture capital**. 

Corporations can also issue **corporate bonds**, formal pledges obligating the issuer to pay regular interest.

- The bondholder claims no ownership. Payments to bondholders take priority over bondholders.
- Terms are spelled out in the **bond indenture**. The **maturity date** is when the firm must repay the **face value**.
- 5-10 year bonds are intermediate term. 10+ year bonds are long-term, which are risker.
- A bond **defaults** if the borrower fails to make payment. Bondhoders can file a **bondholders' claim** to request court enforcement; a company may file for **bankruptcy**.
- Several bond rating systems such as Moody's and S&P rate bonds on a letter grade scale. These ratings can be unreliable, as exemplfiied by their optimistic ratings of mortgage-backed secrutiies.

The **IPO** is the first sale of a company's stock to the general public. A **corporate raider** attempts to seize control of companies by buying cheap stocks, selling off assets. Stock prices are arbitrary as they depend on the number of shares; companies can restore prices to a lower range via a **stock split**. **Market capitalization** refers to the total dollar value of all of a company's outstanding shares.

Firms can raise capital through **debt financing** or **equity financing**.

- Debt financing via long-term loans are quick and private, but may be difficult to find and impose restrictions.
- Bonds can raise large amounts of capital, but require administrative and selling costs.
- Selling common stock is expensive and not tax deductible.
- Retained earnings can be attractive if succesful, but trade off with dividend payments.

A **prospectus** contains information about the offered security and issuing company. The SEC bans **insider trading**, using specialized information to profit.

## Lecture

- Personal finance
  - Older people should shift to less risky.
  - Direct benefit - doesn't depend on contribution.
- Dupont analysis decomposes return on assets into profitability and asset efficiency.

$$
\text{Return on assets} = \text{Net income} / \text{Total assets}\\ = \text{Net profit margin} \times \text{Asset turnover}\\

\frac{\text{Income}}{\text{Assets}} = \frac{\text{Income}}{\text{Revenues}} \times \frac{\text{Revenues}}{\text{Assets}}
$$

- Apple is highly profitable. Amazon's efficiency is 1.41, which is quite high. Tesla's ROa is much lower than Apple's, but it has high revenue growth. Tesla has really low earnings yield and high price earning's ratio because of high expected growth.
- Reserve banking = money is kept.
- Human capita is most important.
- Increasing number of defined contribution schemes over defined benefit schemes
- Most depend on Social Security
- Rebalance stocks periodically to balance stocks and bonds.
- Don't cash out when moving jobs
- 



# Reading

**Claire Cain Miller, “Delivery Start-Ups Are Back Like It’s 1999”, The New York Times**

New startups are once again making delivery start-ups popular. To get around the costs of physical capital, companies like Instacart connect customers with couriers. It relies on people being lazy, which could create a two-tier economy of those who can and can't afford to automate their errands.

**Zumbrun, “Coronavirus Lifts Government Debt to WWII Levels—Cutting It Won’t Be Easy”, The Wall Street Journal (August 2020)**

Debt hit 128% of GDP in July. Admist a war, it shouldn't worry about debt. Population growth is slowing, which makes a similar post-war boom unlikely. Today's high levels of debt have been driven by health care and pensions. There's also no inflation, despite stimulus spending. Central banks buy large quantities of their own debt to bring down interest rates and shore up growth.

**Neil Irwin, “Is Inflation About to Take Off? That’s the Wrong Question”, The New York Times (January 2021)**

Inflation is not up. There are multiple drivers.

1. Yo-yo effect - The economy is recovering very rapidly, particularly in sectors like flight.
2. Hibernation - People are returning to the economy in droves.
3. A huge amount of money is in savings. The Fed probably won't sow ht economy. Powell doesn't believe in inflrationary cycles.
4. Greater labor supply has been keeping inflation low. But, as China's outlook looks bleek, inflation could rise again.

# Practice

- The profit margin equation:

$$
\text{Profit margin} = \frac{\text{Net income}}{\text{Sales}}
$$

- The return on equity equation:

$$
\text{Return on equity} = \frac{\text{Net income}}{\text{Stockholder's equity}}
$$

- A bank run is erasion of confidence in a bank that causes panic withdrawal.
- 



